Add in-process instructions to Azure Functions doc (#2746)
elastic/apm-agent-dotnet: docs/reference/setup-azure-functions.md

Reviewer: Please add a description to the frontmatter, e.g.:

```
description: "Set up the Elastic APM .NET agent to trace Azure Functions invocations using the isolated worker or in-process execution model."
```

# Azure Functions [setup-azure-functions]

The .NET APM Agent can trace function invocations in an [Azure Functions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions) app. Two execution models are supported.

**Don't know which model you're using?** Isolated worker is the recommended and current model. In-process is legacy (reaching end-of-support November 10, 2026). If you're creating a new Azure Function app, use **isolated worker**. If you have an existing in-process app and want to add APM, you'll find instructions in the in-process section below.

> 

Reviewer: I suggest adding a "Supported versions" section:

```
## Supported versions [_supported_versions_azure_functions]

| Hosting model | Package | Supported versions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Isolated worker | `Microsoft.Azure.Functions.Worker` | ≥2.0.0 <3.0.0 |
| In-process (legacy, deprecated) | `Microsoft.Azure.Functions.Extensions` | ≥1.1.0 <2.0.0 |

Runtime requirements: The isolated worker model requires .NET 8+. The in-process model supports .NET Framework 4.7.2+ and .NET 8+ (with `FUNCTIONS_INPROC_NET8_ENABLED=1`).

For the full compatibility matrix including supported installation methods, refer to [Azure Functions](/reference/supported-technologies.md#supported-azure-functions).
```

## Prerequisites [_prerequisites]

> You need an APM Server to send APM data to. Follow the [APM Quick start](docs-content://solutions/observability/apm/get-started.md) if you have not set one up yet. You will need your **APM server URL** and an APM server **API key** for configuring the APM agent below. (If your APM Server uses secret tokens instead, both are supported.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need an APM Server to send APM data to. Follow the [APM Quick start](docs-content://solutions/observability/apm/get-started.md) if you have not set one up yet. You need your **APM server URL** and an APM server **API key** for configuring the APM agent below. (If your APM Server uses secret tokens instead, both are supported.)
```

Please change all instances of future tense to present 🙏  There are several on this page.

> You will also need an Azure Function app to monitor running on **.NET 8+** (for isolated worker model) or **.NET Framework 4.7.2+ or .NET 8+** (for in-process model; .NET 8 requires the `FUNCTIONS_INPROC_NET8_ENABLED=1` setting). If you do not have an existing one, you can follow [this Azure guide](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/create-first-function-cli-csharp) to create one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You also need an Azure Function app to monitor running on **.NET 8+** (for isolated worker model) or **.NET Framework 4.7.2+ or .NET 8+** (for in-process model; .NET 8 requires the `FUNCTIONS_INPROC_NET8_ENABLED=1` setting). If you do not have an existing one, you can follow [Create your first C# function in Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/create-first-function-cli-csharp) to create one.
```

```

### Step 2: Add the tracing middleware [_step_2_add_the_tracing_middleware]

> Register `ApmMiddleware` in your `Program.cs`. The following element uses `ConfigureFunctionsWebApplication`, which is the recommended approach when using the [ASP.NET Core integration](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/dotnet-isolated-process-guide#aspnet-core-integration) (requires the `Microsoft.Azure.Functions.Worker.Extensions.Http.AspNetCore` package):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Register `ApmMiddleware` in your `Program.cs`. The following example uses `ConfigureFunctionsWebApplication`, which is the recommended approach when using the [ASP.NET Core integration](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/dotnet-isolated-process-guide#aspnet-core-integration) (requires the `Microsoft.Azure.Functions.Worker.Extensions.Http.AspNetCore` package):
```

```csharp
using Elastic.Apm.Azure.Functions;
using Microsoft.Azure.Functions.Extensions.DependencyInjection;

[assembly: FunctionsStartup(typeof(MyNamespace.Startup))]

namespace MyNamespace;

public class Startup : FunctionsStartup
{
    public override void Configure(IFunctionsHostBuilder builder) =>
        builder.AddElasticApm();
}
```

The `[assembly: FunctionsStartup]` attribute tells the Azure Functions runtime to invoke this class at startup. No changes to individual function classes are needed.

### Step 3: Configure the APM agent [_step_3_configure_the_apm_agent_in_process]

The APM agent is configured with environment variables:

```yaml
ELASTIC_APM_SERVER_URL: <your APM server URL from the prerequisites step>
ELASTIC_APM_API_KEY: <your APM API key from the prerequisites step>
ELASTIC_APM_ENVIRONMENT: <your environment>
ELASTIC_APM_SERVICE_NAME: <your service name> (optional)
```

If `ELASTIC_APM_SERVICE_NAME` is not configured, the agent uses the same fallback values as the isolated worker model:

> * **Local development** - The discovered service name (the entry Assembly name) will be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Local development** - The discovered service name (the entry assembly name) will be used.
```

Using environment variables allows you to use [application settings in the Azure Portal](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-functions/functions-how-to-use-azure-function-app-settings?tabs=portal#settings), enabling you to update settings without needing to re-deploy code.

Once configured, see [Verify and troubleshoot](#_verify_and_troubleshoot) to confirm data is flowing.

## Verify and troubleshoot [_verify_and_troubleshoot]

**Verify in Kibana**

After deploying your function or running it locally:

1. Open Kibana and navigate to **Observability** → **Applications** → **Service inventory**
2. Look for your service name (configured via `ELASTIC_APM_SERVICE_NAME` or the function app name)
3. Click on the service to see captured transactions and spans

On Consumption plans, allow 30-60 seconds for the first transaction to appear after invoking your function.

**Service doesn't appear in Kibana**

- Verify `ELASTIC_APM_SERVER_URL` is reachable and correct

> - Confirm `ELASTIC_APM_API_KEY` has the required permissions on your APM Server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Confirm `ELASTIC_APM_API_KEY` has the required privileges on your APM Server
```

Not "privileges"? Maybe "permissions" are ok too, I just don't usually see that used in similar context.
